Simplify and clarify the memory terminology article (#3033)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/heap-snapshots.md

# Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool

Use the heap profiler in the **Memory** tool to do the following:

*  Record JavaScript heap (JS heap) snapshots.
*  Analyze memory graphs.
*  Compare snapshots.
*  Find memory leaks.

> The DevTools heap profiler shows memory distribution used by the JavaScript objects and related DOM nodes on the rendered webpage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DevTools heap profiler shows the memory distribution used by the JavaScript objects and by related DOM nodes on the rendered webpage.
```

1. In the **Select profiling type** section, select the **Heap snapshot** option button.

1. Under **Select JavaScript VM instance**, select the process that you want to profile.

1. Click the **Take snapshot** button:

  ![The Memory tool, the Heap snapshot option is selected, and the Take snapshot button is highlighted](./heap-snapshots-images/heap-snapshots.png)

After the newly recorded heap snapshot has been loaded into DevTools and has been parsed, the snapshot is displayed and a new entry appears in the **Profiles** sidebar under **HEAP SNAPSHOTS**:

![Total size of reachable objects](./heap-snapshots-images/heap-snapshots-all.png)

The number below the new sidebar item shows the total size of the reachable JavaScript objects. To learn more about object sizes in the heap snapshot, see [Object sizes and distances](./memory-101.md#object-sizes-and-distances) in _Memory terminology_.

The snapshot only displays the objects from the memory graph that are reachable from the global object. Taking a snapshot always starts with a garbage collection.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Take another snapshot

> To take another snapshot when one is already displayed in the **Memory** tool, click **Profiles** above the existing snapshot in the sidebar:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To take another snapshot when one is already displayed in the **Memory** tool, in the sidebar, click **Profiles** above the existing snapshot:
```
i list steps in order of eye scanning.  First, find X with your eye.  Then find Y in the UI with your eye. ...

![The Profiles button to take another snapshot](./heap-snapshots-images/take-another-snapshot.png)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Clear snapshots

To clear all snapshots from the **Memory** tool, click the **Clear all profiles** (![The clear icon](./heap-snapshots-images/clear-icon.png)) icon:

![Remove snapshots](./heap-snapshots-images/heap-snapshots-all-hover-clear-all-profiles.png)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## View snapshots

> Heap snapshots can be viewed in multiple different ways in the **Memory** tool. Each way corresponds to a different task:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Heap snapshots can be viewed in multiple different ways in the **Memory** tool. Each way of viewing a heap snapshot in the UI corresponds to a different task:
```

> * The **Summary** view shows objects grouped by their constructor name.  Use it to find objects, and the memory they use, based on types grouped by constructor name. The **Summary** view is particularly helpful for **tracking down DOM leaks**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The **Summary** view shows objects grouped by their constructor name.  Use the *Summary* view to find objects, and the memory they use, based on types grouped by constructor name. The **Summary** view is particularly helpful for tracking down DOM leaks.
```
try to make each sentence self-sufficient & meaningful without relying on "it" pointer indirection that requires resolving "it" by reading a different sentence.

Markdown POV: why bold tracking down DOM leaks?
Rendered POV: bolding might help, across multiple entries, like a table.  Finding: that bolding pattern is NOT used across items in list.

Rendered article section: 
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/heap-snapshots?branch=pr-en-us-3033#view-snapshots

> * The **Summary** view shows objects grouped by their constructor name.  Use it to find objects, and the memory they use, based on types grouped by constructor name. The **Summary** view is particularly helpful for **tracking down DOM leaks**.

Reviewer: this list would be more skimmable as a table, to _contrast_/relate the 3 views.  Consider converting list to table.
```
| View | Content | Use for |
|---|---|
| **Summary** | Shows objects grouped by their constructor name. | Finding objects, and the memory they use, based on types that are grouped by constructor name. Helpful for tracking down DOM leaks. |
| **Comparison** | x | x |
| **Containment** | x | x |
```
use this reworded content for row 1

rendered:
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/heap-snapshots?branch=pr-en-us-3033#view-snapshots

<!--todo: add profile memory problems memory diagnosis (tracking down DOM leaks) section when available  -->

> * The **Comparison** view displays the differences between two snapshots. Use it to compare two (or more) memory snapshots from before and after an operation.  Inspecting the delta in freed memory and reference count lets you confirm the presence and cause of a memory leak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The **Comparison** view displays the differences between two snapshots. Use it to compare two (or more) memory snapshots from before and after an operation.  Inspecting the delta in freed memory and inspecting the reference count helps you confirm the presence of a memory leak, and helps determine its cause.
```

* The **Containment** view allows the exploration of the heap contents.  The **Containment** view provides a better view of object structure, helping analyze objects referenced in the global namespace (window) to find out what is keeping objects around.  Use it to analyze closures and dive into your objects at a low level.

To switch between views, use the dropdown list at the top of the **Memory** tool:

![Switch views selector](./heap-snapshots-images/heap-snapshots-view-dropdown.png)

> [!NOTE]
> Not all properties are stored on the JavaScript heap.  Properties implemented using getters that run native code aren't captured.  Also, non-string values such as numbers aren't captured.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Summary view

Initially, a heap snapshot opens in the **Summary** view, which displays a list of constructors. Each constructor in the list can be expanded to show the objects that were instantiated using that constructor:

![Summary view](./heap-snapshots-images/heap-snapshots-constructor-retainers.png)

> Top-level entries in the list of constructors are _total lines_.

Reviewer: needs rewrite.  check rendered section: 
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/heap-snapshots?branch=pr-en-us-3033#summary-view

are we talking about UI string "total lines"?  or terminology in the industry?

> Top-level entries in the list of constructors are _total lines_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the **Constructor** column, the top-level entries show a number such as **x123**, indicating the total number of lines affected.
```

Reviewer: apparently the text is trying to define a term to be reused below, the term _total line_.  Below reads (dubiously): After expanding a total line in the **Summary** view, all of the instances are displayed.

Author: I'm removing total line and changing this section.

| Top-level entries | Description |
|:--- |:--- |
| **Constructor** | Represents all objects created using this constructor. |
| **Distance** | Displays the distance to the root using the shortest simple path of nodes.  See [Distance](./memory-101.md#distance) in _Memory terminology_. |
| **Shallow size** | Displays the sum of shallow sizes of all objects created by a certain constructor function.  The shallow size is the size of memory held by an object (generally, arrays and strings have larger shallow sizes).  See [Shallow size](./memory-101.md#shallow-size) in _Memory terminology_. |
| **Retained size** | Displays the maximum retained size among the same set of objects.  The size of memory that you can free after an object is deleted (and the dependents are made no longer reachable) is called the retained size.  See [Retained size](./memory-101.md#retained-size) in _Memory terminology_. |

> After expanding a total line in the **Summary** view, all of the instances are displayed.  For each instance, the shallow and retained sizes are displayed in the corresponding columns.  The number after the `@` character is the unique ID of the object, allowing you to compare heap snapshots on per-object basis.

Reviewer: rewrite / reformat "a total line", to become grammatical

> After expanding a total line in the **Summary** view, all of the instances are displayed.  For each instance, the shallow and retained sizes are displayed in the corresponding columns.  The number after the `@` character is the unique ID of the object, allowing you to compare heap snapshots on per-object basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After expanding a top-level entry in the **Summary** view, all of the instances are displayed.  For each instance, the shallow and retained sizes are displayed in the corresponding columns.  The number after the `@` character is the unique ID of the object, allowing you to compare heap snapshots on per-object basis.
```

* Yellow objects have JavaScript references.
* Red objects are detached nodes.  A detached node is referenced from a node that has a yellow background.

###### Constructor entries in the Summary view

The **Summary** view in the **Memory** tool lists object constructor groups:

![Constructor groups](./heap-snapshots-images/heap-snapshots-constructor-highlight.png)

The constructor groups in the **Summary** view might be built-in functions such as `Array` or `Object` or they might be functions defined in your own code.

To reveal the list of objects that were instantiated by a given constructor, expand the constructor group.

###### Special category names in the Summary view

The **Summary** view also contains special category names that aren't based on constructors. These special categories are:

> <!-- Taken from https://github.com/sethbrenith/sethbrenith.github.io/blob/main/heap-snapshot-names.md -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- from https://github.com/sethbrenith/sethbrenith.github.io/blob/main/heap-snapshot-names.md -->
```
"taken" has some connotations, not needed

| Category name | Description |
|:--- |:--- |

> | **(array)** | Various internal array-like objects which don't directly correspond to objects visible from JavaScript, such as the contents of JavaScript Arrays, or the named properties of JavaScript objects. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **(array)** | Various internal array-like objects that don't directly correspond to objects visible from JavaScript, such as the contents of JavaScript Arrays, or the named properties of JavaScript objects. |
```
i'd probably use "which", but allegedly it should be "that", unless add comma.
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/t/that-vs-which

| **system / Context** | Local variables from a JavaScript scope which can be accessed by some nested function. Every function instance contains an internal pointer to the context in which it executes, so that it can access those variables. |
| **(system)** | Various internal objects that haven't yet been categorized in any more meaningful way. |

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Comparison view

To find leaked objects, compare multiple snapshots to each other.  In a web application, usually, doing an action and then the reverse action shouldn't lead to more objects in memory. For example, when opening a document and then closing it, the number of objects in memory should be the same as before opening the document.

To verify that certain operations don't create leaks:

1. Take a heap snapshot before performing an operation.

1. Perform the operation.  That is, interact with the page in some way that might be causing a leak.

1. Perform the reverse operation.  That is, do the opposite interaction and repeat it a few times.

1. Take a second heap snapshot.

1. In the second heap snapshot, change the view to **Comparison**, comparing it to **Snapshot 1**.

> In the **Comparison** view, the difference between two snapshots is displayed.  When expanding a total entry, added and deleted object instances are shown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the **Comparison** view, the difference between two snapshots is displayed.  When expanding a total entry, added and deleted object instances are shown:
```
rendered:
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/heap-snapshots?branch=pr-en-us-3033#comparison-view

![Comparison view](./heap-snapshots-images/heap-snapshots-comparison-dropdown.png)

<!--todo: add HeapProfilingComparison section when available  -->

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Containment view

> The **Containment** view is essentially a "bird's eye view" of the objects structure of your application.  It allows you to peek inside function closures, to observe virtual machine (VM) internal objects that together make up your JavaScript objects, and to understand how much memory your application uses at a very low level. <!-- Low level makes little sense since we just said it provided a bird's eye view. -->

Reviewer: at first i thought "the objects structure" was a typo and should be "the object's structure".  try reversing words.
```suggestion
The **Containment** view is essentially a "bird's eye view" of the objects structure of your application.  It allows you to peek inside function closures, to observe virtual machine (VM) internal objects that together make up your JavaScript objects, and to understand how much memory your application uses at a very low level. <!-- "low level" makes little sense, since we just said it provided a "bird's eye view". -->
```
also: per style guide, don't write colloquialism/analogy "bird".  Speak directly/ technically/ literally.

Author: I'm going to remove the first sentence, it makes no sense to me, and I don't think it brings value.

![The Retainers section](./heap-snapshots-images/retainers-section.png)

###### Hide cycles

In the **Retainers** section, when you analyze the objects which retain the selected object, you might encounter _cycles_. Cycles occur when the same object appears more than once in the retainer path of the selected object. In the **Retainers** section, a cycled object is indicated by being grayed out.

To help simplify the retainer path, hide cycles in the **Retainers** section by clicking the **Filter edges** dropdown menu and then selecting **Hide cycled**:

![The Filter edges dropdown menu in the Retainers section, 'Hide cycled' is selected](./heap-snapshots-images/filters-retainers-memory-tool-no-hide-cycled.png)

###### Hide internal nodes

_Internal nodes_ are objects that are specific to V8 (the JavaScript engine in Microsoft Edge).

To hide internal nodes from the **Retainers** section, in the **Filter edges** dropdown menu, select **Hide internal**.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Filter heap snapshots by node types

Use filters to focus on specific parts of a heap snapshot.

> When looking at all the objects in a heap snapshot in the **Memory** tool, it can be difficult to focus on specific objects or retaining paths.  Use the **Node Types** filter when looking at a heap snapshot, to focus on only specific types of nodes.  For example, to see only the arrays and string objects that are in the heap, select the **Array** and **String** entries in the **Node Types** filter.

Reviewer: need to add a colon to form a lead-in gluing text & png.  check rendered:
https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/memory-problems/heap-snapshots?branch=pr-en-us-3033#filter-heap-snapshots-by-node-types

> When looking at all the objects in a heap snapshot in the **Memory** tool, it can be difficult to focus on specific objects or retaining paths.  Use the **Node Types** filter when looking at a heap snapshot, to focus on only specific types of nodes.  For example, to see only the arrays and string objects that are in the heap, select the **Array** and **String** entries in the **Node Types** filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When looking at all the objects in a heap snapshot in the **Memory** tool, it can be difficult to focus on specific objects or retaining paths.  When looking at a heap snapshot, to focus on only specific types of nodes, use the **Node Types** filter, in the upper right.  For example, to see only the arrays and string objects in the heap, select the **Array** and **String** entries in the **Node Types** filter:
```

Reviewer: does tooltip say **Node Types**?
ans: __

> ![Node Types in a heap snapshot in the Memory tool](heap-snapshots-images/node-types-heap-snapshot.png)

Reviewer: png is hard to understand where the "Node Types filter" is on the screen.  Add red box around the **Default v** dropdown?  Even add a text callout in png??

Author: I'm adding a red box, and I'm mentioning that users need to click **Default** to open the filter.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Uncover DOM leaks

The heap profiler has the ability to reflect bidirectional dependencies between browser native objects (DOM nodes, CSS rules) and JavaScript objects.  This helps to discover otherwise invisible leaks that happen because of forgotten detached DOM subtrees that remain in memory.

> Consider the following code sample.  When is the element with ID `tree` garbage-collected?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider the following code sample: when is the element with ID `tree` garbage-collected?
```

```javascript

> // Getting a reference to the #tree element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Get a reference to the #tree element.
```
GLOBAL: -ing is quite unusual in code comments.  not needed; omit.  some spoken langs allegedly don't have "-ing".

var treeRef = document.querySelector("#tree");

> // Getting a reference to the #leaf element,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Get a reference to the #leaf element,
```

// which is a descendant of the #tree element.
var leafRef = document.querySelector("#leaf");

> // Removing the #tree element from the DOM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Remove the #tree element from the DOM.
```

document.body.removeChild(treeRef);

// The #tree element can't be garbage-collected yet
// because the treeRef variable still exists.

// Removing the treeRef variable.
treeRef = null;

// The #tree element is still not garbage-collected
// because of the indirect reference from the leafRef variable.

// Removing the leafRef variable.
leafRef = null;

// Now the #tree element can be garbage-collected.
```

> 

Reviewer: above, we introducted the code block by posing a question (a dubious way of writing, but works):

When is the element with ID `tree` garbage-collected?

Here, we must explicitly repeat that phrasing and now deliver the answer in a way that makes it clear the question and the answer to that question.
```suggestion
When is the element with ID `tree` garbage-collected?  The above code indicates that the element with ID `tree` garbage-collected when X.
```
manually apply this change

Author: Re-worked the entire section to avoid asking the question.

> The element with ID `leaf` maintains a reference to its ancestor nodes in the DOM, which includes the element with ID `tree`. Both `treeRef` and `leafRef` must be nullified for the whole DOM tree under the element with ID `tree` to be garbage-collected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The element with ID `leaf` maintains a reference to its ancestor nodes in the DOM, which includes the element with ID `tree`. Both `treeRef` and `leafRef` must first be nullified, for the whole DOM tree under the element with ID `tree` to be garbage-collected.
```
* first - a "when" question was posed before the code block, so "first" is a suitable when-word.
* comma

> ![DOM subtrees](./heap-snapshots-images/memory-problems-tree-gc.png)

Reviewer: solution:  move .png up by 1 sentence:

The element with ID leaf maintains a reference to its ancestor nodes in the DOM, which includes the element with ID tree: [colon lead-in]

png

Both treeRef and leafRef must be nullified for the whole DOM tree under the element with ID tree to be garbage-collected.

> ![DOM subtrees](./heap-snapshots-images/memory-problems-tree-gc.png)

Reviewer: important: add red boxes

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Demo webpage: Example 6: Leaking DOM nodes

> Open the example webpage [Example 6: Leaking DOM nodes](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/devtools-memory-heap-snapshot/example-06.html) in a new window or tab, to understand where DOM nodes might leak, and how to detect such leakage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand where DOM nodes might leak, and how to detect such leakage, open the example webpage [Example 6: Leaking DOM nodes](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/devtools-memory-heap-snapshot/example-06.html) in a new window or tab.
```
antipattern (b/c reversed): 
Do A, B, and then C, if you want to D.
not always bad, but consider here.

<!-- You can view the source files for the Heap Snapshots demo pages at the [MicrosoftEdge/Demos > devtools-memory-heap-snapshot](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/tree/main/devtools-memory-heap-snapshot) repo folder. -->

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Demo webpage: Example 9: DOM leaks bigger than expected

> Open the example webpage [Example 9: DOM leaks bigger than expected](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/devtools-memory-heap-snapshot/example-09.html) in a new window or tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see why a DOM leak might be bigger than expected, open the example webpage [Example 9: DOM leaks bigger than expected](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/devtools-memory-heap-snapshot/example-09.html) in a new window or tab.
```

<!--[narrow down causes of memory leaks](../profile/memory-problems/memory-diagnosis#narrow-down-causes-of-memory-leaks) -->

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Analyze the impact of closures on memory

To analyze the impact of closures on memory, try out this example:

1. Open the [Eval is evil](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/devtools-memory-heap-snapshot/example-07.html) demo webpage in a new window or tab.

> 1. Record a first heap snapshot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Record a heap snapshot.
```
reword simpler, to avoid my mis-parsing that happened:
Record a snapshot of type "first heap".
Record a first-heap snapshot.  (What's a first-heap snapshot?)

1. In the rendered webpage, click the **Closures with eval** button.

1. Record a second heap snapshot.

   In the sidebar, the number below the second snapshot should be larger than the number below the first snapshot. This indicates that more memory is being used by the webpage after clicking the **Closures with eval** button.

> 1. In the second heap snapshot, change the view to **Comparison**, comparing it to the first one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the second heap snapshot, change the view to **Comparison**, comparing the view or snapshot to the first view or snapshot.
```
manually apply this sketchy wording change

"it" ... "one" - i'm lost.  too many indirection wildcard pointer words.  Speak directly.

the phrase "comparing it to the first one" cannot be made sense of, w/o labor of analysis to resolve indirection pointer words

   The **Comparison** view shows that new strings were created in the second heap snapshot:

>    ![The comparison view, showing that new strings were created in the second snapshot](./heap-snapshots-images/closure-retained-strings.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ![The Comparison view, showing that new strings were created in the second snapshot](./heap-snapshots-images/closure-retained-strings.png)
```

1. In the **Comparison** view, expand the **(string)** constructor.

1. Click the first **(string)** entry.

   The **Retainers** section is updated and shows that the `largeStr` variable retains the string selected in the **Comparison** view.

   The `largeStr` entry is automatically expanded and shows that the variable is retained by the `eC` function, which is the closure where the variable is defined:

   ![The Retainers section, showing that the string is retained by the eC function](./heap-snapshots-images/closure-retained-strings-details.png)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Tip: name functions to differentiate between closures in a snapshot

To easily distinguish between JavaScript closures in a heap snapshot, give your functions names.

The following example uses an unnamed function to return the `largeStr` variable:

```javascript
function createLargeClosure() {
    const largeStr = 'x'.repeat(1000000).toLowerCase();

    // This function is unnamed.
    const lC = function() {
        return largeStr;
    };

    return lC;
}
```

> The following example names the function, which makes it easier to distinguish between closures in the recorder heap snapshot:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example names the function, which makes it easier to distinguish between closures in the heap snapshot:
```
recorder was confusing to me, seems unnecessary
